# 2019-02-27

## Hashing Tables

### Java Hashcode function 
    - Its a method of `Object` class, every class has hashCode method.

    ```java
    String[] table = new String[7];
    String name = "Emanuel";
    int hc = name.hashCode();
    int index = Math.abs(hc) % table.length;
    table[index] = name;
    ```

### Generating hashCodes

Integer key 90123456789

#### 1. Extraction: 

- Divide useful part of key into pieces

#### 2. Weighting: 

- Multiply each part by a weight

#### 3. Folding: 

- Put it all back together to return it (int).

##### Object class has a hashCode method 

- Only thing we know about it is its memory address.
- Algorithm is the same.
- Consistent with .equals(), two objects are equal if they have **same memory address**. They will generate same hashcode.

### Handling `String` Keys

- Let Ci be the **ASCII** code for the `charAt(i)`.
- Ex. "cat", c = 67, a = 65, t = 84.

##### How does java computer hascode for strings?

- hashCode = Co * 31^n-1 + C1 * 31^n-2 + ... Cn-1*1
- so CAT = 67 * 31^2 + 65 * 31^1 + 84 * 1 = 66486
- Why 31?
  - Its prime
  - One less than the power of 2
  - 31 * i = ( 32 - 1 ) * i
  - 32 * i - i
  - i * 2^5 - i = **(i << 5)** - 1 **Binary shift to the left 5 places**

Take some integer = 3, ---> 0011 in binary
    - left shift of 1 digit = 6 ---> 0110 in binary
    - left shift of 1 digit = 12 ---> 1100 in binary

### Handling `Double` Keys

- Stores a 64 bit floating point
- Splits into upper 32 bits, lower 32 bits
    1. Does the split
    2. Perform a bitwise exclusive `OR`.
        - k = 0110, 1011 8 bits 
        - upper: 0110, lower: 1011 `XOR by column`
        - `int result = 1101;` actual number is 13 <-- hashcode

```java
long bits = Double, doubleToLongBits(key)
int lower = (int) bits
int upper = (int) bits >> 32
int result = upper ^ lower
```

### Resizing hash Tables

- table is TS = 5
- insert by doing int % tablesize;
- if table to small, increase table size and you would need to rehash

### Types of Open Addressing:

1. Linear Probing: if index is occupied, keep going until you find a spot.
2. Quadratic probing: find new index by squaring the position H+ 1^2, H + 2^2... H + K^2
3. Double Hashing: Apply a second hash function
4. Buckets: Storing a DS in the index, can be any type. 